This paper introduces several novel strategies for multi-step-ahead
prediction of chaotic time series. Introducing a concept of
“generalized z-vectors” (vectors of nonsuccessive time series
observations) makes it possible to generate sets of possible
prediction values for each point we are trying to predict.
Through examining these sets, unifed predictions are calculated,
which are in turn used as a basis for predicting subsequent points.
The key diference between the strategy presented in this paper and
its conventional counterparts is the concept of
“nonpredictable” points (points which the algorithm categorized
as “incalculable” and excluded from the calculations altogether).
The results obtained for the benchmark and real-world time
series indicate that while typically the number of nonpredictable points
tends to grow exponentially with the number of steps ahead
to be predicted, the average error for predicted points remains
small and nearly constant. Thus, we redefine the problem of
multi-step-ahead prediction as a two-objective optimization
problem: on one hand, we aim to minimize the number of nonpredictable
points and the average error among the predictable ones.
The resulting strategy demonstrates accurate results for both
benchmark and real-world time series, with the number of predicted
steps exceeding that of any other published algorithm.
Introduction
There are countless examples of chaotic systems in the world,
which is evidenced by the constantly increasing number of chaotic
time series forecasting algorithms. However, while those dealing
with one-step-ahead prediction demonstrate remarkable eficiency
REFERENCE_1, their multi-step-ahead prediction counterparts are
still in their infancy. This may be attributed to the exponential growth
of an average prediction error with increasing prediction horizon
(the number of steps ahead to be predicted).
This exponential growth refects Lyapunov instability,
inherent to any chaotic system. According to the defnition of Lyapunov
instability, any initial diference between any two neighboring
trajectories, however small, grows exponentially over time; its
exponent equals to the highest Lyapunov exponent VARIABLE_1 REFERENCE_2 REFERENCE_3.
Lyapunov instability leads to another concept, that of the horizon
of predictability, sometimes referred to as “Lyapunov time” REFERENCE_4.
For a given observational error VARIABLE_2 and the maximum
prediction error VARIABLE_3, the aforementioned exponential growth satisfes
the constraint FORMULA_1, where FUNCTION_1 represents error at the
moment VARIABLE_4 and VARIABLE_1, the highest Lyapunov exponent (which is positive
for chaotic time series and negative for the non- chaotic ones).
ε(t) ≤ εmax gives an estimated horizon of predictability
T ∼ 1/λ lnεmax /ε(0) [2, 3]. In the context of the multi-step-ahead
prediction, it follows that the smallest diference between true and
predicted values at any in- termediate position between the last
observable point and the point to be predicted triggers an exponential
error growth in all subsequent points, regardless of the employed
prediction method. It should be noted that the horizon of predictability should
not be confused with the prediction horizon, the former being
a theoretical upper boundary for the number of steps to be predicted
(given ε(0) and εmax), and the latter being simply the number steps to
be predicted. Most of the time, the prediction horizon h is signifcantly
less than the horizon of predictability T: h ≪ T.
However,
predictive clustering approach provides the necessary tools
for dealing with exponential growth of the average pre-
diction error [5, 6].
First, predictive clustering utilizes motifs, repeated se-
quences of data in a series. If a section of a time series
resembles an initial part of a motif “closely enough,” it is
likely that the subsequent points of the series will closely
match the subsequent points of the motif, thus enabling the
use of motifs for forecasting the time series at hand. Motifs
can be obtained by clustering vectors of observations and
calculating their centers. It should be noted that whereas
most available prediction methods attempt to construct
a single unifed prediction model, the motifs provided by
predictive clustering form a set of local prediction models.
Second, Gromov and Borisenko [6] proposed using
generalized z-vector templates, vectors of nonsuccessive
observations, which are spaced out according to some
predefned pattern. A pattern is a vector of distances between
positions of series observations. Te resulting vector gen-
eralizes a conventional z-vector (successive observations),
which corresponds to a pattern (1,1,...,1) L − 1 times.
Figure 1 demonstrates a z-vector constructed according to
a pattern k1,k2,...,kL−1,ki ∈N.